UC3: fixes and add story for privacy (#241)
solid/authorization-panel: proposals/evaluation/uc-3-inheritance.md

  acp:applyMembers </acp/research#p1> . # applies the policy to all resources contained by </weekly-status/>
```

### Accessing `</weekly-status/>`

An unauthenticated agent making a GET on the `</weekly-status/>` container will receive a `Link: <.acp>; rel="acl"` header in the `401` response that points to the above `<.acp>`. 

> This relation makes the contents of `</weekly-status/.acp>` authoritative and is, therefore, the information the client can use to decide what credentials to present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This relation makes the contents of `</weekly-status/.acp>` authoritative and is, therefore, the information the client can use to decide which credentials to present.
```

[Actors](https://essif-lab.pages.grnet.gr/framework/docs/terms/actor) whose [principal](https://essif-lab.pages.grnet.gr/framework/docs/essifLab-glossary#principal) are not members of the research institute, will not have access to the policy `</acp/research#p1>` and so, not knowing what credential to present will stop there.

### Accessing `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.md>`

> Any [digital actor](https://essif-lab.pages.grnet.gr/framework/docs/terms/digital-actor) making a request to  `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.md>` will receive in the header of a 401, a link to `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.acp>`. If that actor makes a `GET` request to that `<report.acp>` it will receive a graph isomorphic to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any [digital actor](https://essif-lab.pages.grnet.gr/framework/docs/terms/digital-actor) making a request to  `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.md>` will receive in the header of a 401, a link to `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.acp>`. If that actor makes a `GET` request to that `<report.acp>` and has permissions to read it, it will receive a graph isomorphic to:
```

Author: Btw. who has currently permission to read the acp as stated? Can we make it public now that the group and policy is protected? Otherwise we need to grow the story quite a lot to explain how the client knows what the acp is.

Reviewer: I wouldn't make it public now, no. And I didn't make that statement. I don't think we should address the "control" part here. It would make everything way too complex and I would much rather address it in a different document. Or at least in a different section of the document.

In all honesty, I start to think control resource management might require its own use case too.

Author: > I wouldn't make it public now, no. 

why? What is the problem.

Reviewer: The control question is not answered in the WAC examples either.

The UC3 is supposed to be about inheritance. It is difficult enough to address the concerns related to inheritance to not overload this document with everything else. Otherwise, we'll end up with a massive use case that is extremely complicated.

It's already pretty difficult to comprehend as is.

And we're deviating from or actually not discussing inheritance which is in itself a complex subject that deserves attention.

I find it really difficult and distracting to address all concerns at once.

Author: That is why I suggest making the ACLs public. Then we have a simple answer as to how a client gets to see them. And we avoid the privacy problem by making the policies access controlled. We don't need to delve into those too much.

If we don't include the client in this use cases, we don't have a protocol.

Reviewer: This specific use case is about inheritance and does not include the question: "How can an agent discover which credentials to present to access a resource?"

That question is important and we need to discuss it elsewhere, in a specific use case.

A use case stating that Bob is not logged in and has multiple WebIDs and wants to access a resource but doesn't know how to chose which credentials...

I don't want to make up ACLs to be public because it doesn't answer the question asked by a very valid concern and a use case that in my opinion has not been clearly formulated as of yet.

Let's discuss inheritance here.

I'm not dismissing the question of required credentials discovery.

I agree that we don't have a full fledged protocol without it.

Reviewer 2: > The UC3 is supposed to be about inheritance. It is difficult enough to address the concerns related to inheritance to not overload this document with everything else. Otherwise, we'll end up with a massive use case that is extremely complicated.

👍 💯 

> Let's discuss inheritance here.

👍 💯

Author: > This specific use case is about inheritance and does not include the question: "How can an agent discover which credentials to present to access a resource?"

I did not discuss that here. All I did was make the group of Alice and Bob `</acp/research#m1>` private so that we can deal with privacy concerns. That is not much of a change from the initial story. 

We could simplify and say that Alice and Bob are happy for the world to know they are part of the publicly funded research project and so is Carol.  The we can make all these rules public and can concentrate on the inheritance issues.

> I agree that we don't have a full fledged protocol without it.

It is not acceptable to discuss a protocol for authorization which does not take both client and server into account. It would be like wanting to get married but not consider one's partner in the process. These things come together by nature. 
This is especially the case in a decentralised scenario, where clients are jumping from resource to resource. So we should not assume the client is already authenticated. Otherwise, what would be the point of a Linked Data based RESTful authorization protocol? 

> I don't want to make up ACLs to be public because it doesn't answer the question asked by a very valid concern and a use case that in my opinion has not been clearly formulated as of yet.

You mean the concern "How can an agent discover which credentials to present to access a resource?"

We don't have to make it a concern as we can 
 1) either stipulate that the agent has been informed via LDN of it's inclusion in the private group under a given ID
 2) or make the group public because everyone is ok with that, in which case the client just needs to look at the group description.

We can then later look at more detailed scenarios. We could work on Credentials based versions too if you want. But not including the client is not acceptable.

Reviewer: > It is not acceptable to discuss a protocol for authorization which does not take both client and server into account.

I agree and I am not suggesting not to take the client into account. I am saying that it is acceptable to assume the actor has already authenticated as "Bob" in this specific use case which is meant to address inheritance.

> You mean the concern "How can an agent discover which credentials to present to access a resource?"
>
> We don't have to make it a concern ...

I am very confused. On the one hand you insist on talking about the way an actor can understand which WebID or credential to use to get access to a resource and on the other hand you claim it is not a concern.

I think it is important to discuss because one way or another, for sure, LDN is a mechanism that can be useful, for sure an ACR can be edited in clever ways to disclose information that is acceptably publicly readable and maybe even it is all we'll ever need. However, it has not been clearly expressed anywhere and an UC focusing on inheritance is not the place to have that debate.

I think Use Cases focus on different parts of functionality in order to be more comprehensible and it is fine.

I want to extract away from this UC concerns related to:
1. Effective ACR discovery
2. Required Credential discovery

Not because it is not important, on the contrary, because those are extremely important concerns that are not trivial to address and deserve a dedicated conversation.

So does inheritance, which we are not addressing with this debate. I feel like we are in a bit of a deadlock here and I don't think it is necessary.

Please do edit as you see fit because what you suggest does make sense, I just try to push for a slightly different organisation of concerns. Maybe you're right and what I suggest is not ideal. I'm sure we can get to a place which satisfies both of us incrementally.

Author: > > It is not acceptable to discuss a protocol for authorization which does not take both client and server into account.
> 
> I agree and I am not suggesting not to take the client into account. I am saying that it is acceptable to assume the actor has already authenticated as "Bob" in this specific use case which is meant to address inheritance.
> 

There is no point in developing a story assuming the client has already authenticated correctly as Bob. If it did the client would make a request on the resource and not receive a 401. There would be no story to tell here. There would be no client server interaction with respect to authorization. 

> > You mean the concern "How can an agent discover which credentials to present to access a resource?"
> > We don't have to make it a concern ...
> 
> I am very confused. On the one hand you insist on talking about the way an actor can understand which WebID or credential to use to get access to a resource and on the other hand you claim it is not a concern.

yes, the client (or the wallet's Agent) needs to know what identity to use to authenticate. The reason it is better to start with all resources being public is because it is then very easy to see how the client can using follow-your-nose principles to find that out. It is not a concern for us in that sense because we are used to working with Linked Data. So a Linked Data client starting from (1) the resource that returned a 401 can jump to (2) the ACL and from there to (3) the Group document and from there to  (4) the WebID Profile of the client's Principal. (each of these steps can be cashed of course, especially the last).

In (1) the 401 also returns with the Link header one or more `WWW-Authenticate` headers, one of which can be a [HttpSig method](https://github.com/bblfish/authentication-panel/blob/main/proposals/HttpSignature.md#the-sequence-diagram). This tells the client that it can use a WebKey tied to the WebID. This will let it know what key to use to authenticate using "Signing HTTP Messages".  Other protocols are possible, and we don't need to go into those here. 
 
> I think it is important to discuss because one way or another, for sure, LDN is a mechanism that can be useful, for sure an ACR can be edited in clever ways to disclose information that is acceptably publicly readable and maybe even it is all we'll ever need. However, it has not been clearly expressed anywhere and an UC focusing on inheritance is not the place to have that debate.

Ok, so let us make these resource public here. There are many other examples where they are protected (I am thinking of the CV examples) where we can go into those. Here we are dealing with research stuff, and  it is really not unreasonble to have a story where 3 people are happy to be public about their WebID pseudo identity. After all they need only publish a public key at that WebID! So even with the pseudo published they might not leak any private information!

The privacy concerns are what make the story more complicated (as it would!)
Perhaps we can open up the use case with the CV and do that with the privacy concerns and then link from here to show how those issues are dealt with.

> 
> I think Use Cases focus on different parts of functionality in order to be more comprehensible and it is fine.
> 
> I want to extract away from this UC concerns related to:
> 
> 1. Effective ACR discovery
> 2. Required Credential discovery
> 
> Not because it is not important, on the contrary, because those are extremely important concerns that are not trivial to address and deserve a dedicated conversation.

Effective ACR discovery is part of every use case. It is something we can go into more details in other cases, taking on more complex examples such as those requiring privacy.  But we can't put it aside. 

> 
> So does inheritance, which we are not addressing with this debate. I feel like we are in a bit of a deadlock here and I don't think it is necessary.
>

I think we have addressed inheritance very well. We have pinpointed the current problems of WAC with regard to inheritance and  a couple of ways to overcome them. We are also seeing problems with regard to duplication of content, both with ACP and with WAC. We should look at those more closely and see how problematic they are. 

 
> Please do edit as you see fit because what you suggest does make sense, I just try to push for a slightly different organisation of concerns. Maybe you're right and what I suggest is not ideal. I'm sure we can get to a place which satisfies both of us incrementally.

I feel the exercise is very successful. I am ok with moving the privacy relevant stuff to a separate story, and make every thing public here to simplify. Perhaps better create that other example first before changing it here though.

# Resource: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.acp>
<#ac1>
  a acp:AccessControl ;
  acp:apply </acp/research#p1> .
```

Note that the triples in `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.acp>` are generated from the statements in `</weekly-status/.acp>`. 

> All resources in ACP have their own associated effective Access Control Resource.

Reviewer 3: Does ACP here mean Access Control Protection or Policy?  If the first, it isn't the expansion used elsewhere nearby, so I would expand it and not use the acronym.  If the second, the sentence will need some rephrasing.

Reviewer: ACP means "Access Control Policy" refering to the new spec in the making.

```

> 

Author: Is this applyMembers correct for an ACP on a `ldp:Resource`? I would have thought that only made sense on an `ldp:Container`

Reviewer: You're correct, line 87 needs to go (and fullstop at the end of line 86).

Reviewer: Thanks :)

  vcard:hasMember ex:Alice .
```

> This vcard is visible only to members of the research organization. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This vcard is visible only to members of the research group. 
```

```

Any agent making a GET on the `</weekly-status/>` container will receive a `Link: <.acp>; rel="acl"` header in the `401` response that points to the above `<.acl>`. 
This relation makes the contents of `</weekly-status/.acl>` authoritative and is, therefore, the information the client must use to decide what credentials to present, and the resource's Guard to decide whether to accept those credentials.

At present, though, only the controller of `</weekly-status/.acl>` can read that resource, as WAC does not have an option to make the ACL more widely readable. (Some proposals: adding a [ControlRead](https://github.com/solid/web-access-control-spec/issues/85) mode or [ACLs on ACLs](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/189)).

#### b. Accessing `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.md>`

A unauthenticated client actor making a GET request to  `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.md>` may receive in the header of a `401`, either of the following: 

1) `Link: </weekly-status/.acl>; rel=acl`. 
2) `Link: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.acl>; rel=acl`

> As pointed out previously, only the controller and the resource guard can read those, all other actors (eg. Alice or Bob) need undefined out-of-band knowledge to know how to authenticate. So we are limited to the controller actor.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As pointed out previously, only the controller and the resource guard can read those; all other actors (e.g., Alice or Bob) need undefined out-of-band knowledge to know how to authenticate. We are therefore limited to the controller actor.
```

Author: cheers. I am trying to get Grammarly to work with Visual Studio Code. There is an unofficial plugin, and so it does not work that well.

> In (1) the actor whose Principal is the Controller, will be able to determine using inheritance what credentials it can use. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In (1), the actor whose Principal is the Controller will be able to use inheritance to determine what credentials it can use. 
```

> In (2) the resource may either be created already, in which case the default rule of `</weekly-status/.acl>` does not apply, or it is not created yet, and the default applies but the client cannot know what the default acl is.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In (2), the resource may either has been created already, in which case the default rule of `</weekly-status/.acl>` does not apply, or it has not yet been created, so the default applies, but the client cannot know what the default acl is.
```

1) `Link: </weekly-status/.acl>; rel=acl`. 
2) `Link: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.acl>; rel=acl`

As pointed out previously, only the controller and the resource guard can read those; all other actors (e.g., Alice or Bob) need undefined out-of-band knowledge to know how to authenticate. We are therefore limited to the controller actor.

> In (1), the actor whose Principal is the Controller, will be able to determine from the `acl:default` rules what credentials it can use. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In (1), the actor whose Principal is the Controller will be able to determine the credentials it can use from the `acl:default` rules. 
```

> In (2), the `acl` resource may either already be created, in which case the default rule of `</weekly-status/.acl>` does not apply, or it has not yet been created, so the default applies, but the client cannot know what the default `acl` is.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In (2), either the `acl` resource has already been created, in which case the default rule of `</weekly-status/.acl>` does not apply, or the `acl` resource has not yet been created, so the default applies, but the client cannot know what the default `acl` is.
```

  acl:mode acl:Read, acl:Write .
```

As soon this is created, the old ACR will no longer be authoritative. 

### WAC+ relaxing acl:default

If one were to want the `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` ACR to continue to use `</weekly-status/.acl>` then one could make the `acl:default` more flexible as follows.

According to the [ACL ontology definition as of July 2021](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/pull/216#discussion_r665338497), the `acl:default` predicate is only effective in statements where the current container is the object; that is, the resource `</weekly-status/.acl>`, which is the direct effective access control list of `</weekly-status/>`, can only target that directory in statements using `acl:default`.

However, if WAC's use of `acl:default` were to be relaxed as described in [issue 191](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/191), then one could rely on the effective access control resource discovery mechanism and augment the content of `</weekly-status/.acl>`:

```Turtle

> # Resource: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Resource: </weekly-status/.acl>
```

We're describing the case where `acl:default` is relaxed and can target any container that end up with the Access control resource as effective ACL.

  acl:mode acl:Read, acl:Write .
```

As soon as this ACL is created, the old ACL will no longer be authoritative. 

> The problem here is that we need to copy many of the statements from `</weekly-status/.acl>` in the new acl, which means that changes to the root acl do not get propagated, and the more changes there are, the more places will need to be edited to make any future changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The problem here is that we need to copy many of the statements from `</weekly-status/.acl>` into the new acl; this means that subsequent changes to the root acl will not get automatically propagated, and the more resources there are, the more places will need to be edited to carry through any future changes made to the root acl.
```

See also: https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/pull/216#discussion_r665230245

> The problem here is that we need to make a copy of `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>` in the new acl, which means that changes to the root acl do not get propagated, and the more changes there are the more places will need to be edited to make any changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is exactly the opposite of what is described here.

With `acl:default` relaxed, you don't need any copies, you get all the authorizations in the effective ACR applied.

Author: Thanks for spotting all those little mistakes. 
This paragraph I think was meant to be placed in the previous section. I need a bigger screen to get a better overview.

Author: Ok, I moved that and made other fixes.
I think these changes should be getting better, as I get into it, after having been away for a week or more.

### WAC+ ac:imports +acr 

[WAC+:imports](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/210) is explained most easily if we also require every
resource to link to its own ACR, as ACP does.
This removes the out-of-band ACL discovery problem and makes it easy for a client to find out where the effective ACR is.

We keep `wac:default` working as currently specified.
 

> A unauthenticated client that makes a GET on `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` will receives a `401` with a `Link` to `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An unauthenticated client that makes a GET on `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` will receives a `401` with a `Link` to `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`. 
```

See also: https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/pull/216#discussion_r665230245

> As a result the acl's for all the resources could be pointing to the root acl. But doing that will tend to place all the ACLs on a Pod together, giving anyone with access to that acl, visibility on all the access control rules of the Pod.

Reviewer 3: I had been thinking, and am fairly sure now, that `acl` should be made all-caps throughout.  I'm only doing so on this paragraph, but suggest that this soon be carried throughout.
```suggestion
As a result the ACLs for all the resources could be pointing to the root ACL. But doing that will tend to place all the ACLs on a Pod together, giving anyone with access to that ACL, visibility on all the access control rules of the Pod.
```

### WAC+ ac:imports +acr 

[WAC+:imports](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/210) is explained most easily if we also require every resource to link to its own ACR, as ACP does.
This makes it easy for a client to find out where the effective ACR is.

We keep `wac:default` working as currently specified. Note, that this proposal is also compatible with more flexible acl:defaults, and indeed with the use of general `wac:accessToClass` descriptions, such as classes of resources with a specific tag.
 
An unauthenticated client that makes a `GET` on `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` will receives a `401` with a `Link` to `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`. 

> The  container when newly created would contain the following triple 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The  container when newly created would contain the following triple:
```

```Turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/.ac>

<> ac:imports <../.acl> .
```

This allows any client (including the controller's client) to find the default rule by following their nose.

> The current WAC inheritance algorithm, states that the inheritance no longer works for a resource that has an ACL. But that does not stop inherticance from from being explicitly defined using `ac:imports`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The current WAC inheritance algorithm states that the automatic inheritance no longer has effect for a resource that has an ACL, but that does not stop inheritance from from being explicitly defined using `ac:imports`.
```

We keep `wac:default` working as currently specified. Note, that this proposal is also compatible with more flexible acl:defaults, and indeed with the use of general `wac:accessToClass` descriptions, such as classes of resources with a specific tag.
 
An unauthenticated client that makes a `GET` on `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` will receives a `401` with a `Link` to `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`. 

> The  container when newly created would contain the following triple:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When newly created, the container would contain the following triple:
```

This allows any client (including the controller's client) to find the default rule by following their nose.

> The current WAC inheritance algorithm states that the automatic inheritance no longer has effect for a resource that has an ACL, but that does not stop inheritance from from being explicitly defined using `ac:imports`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The current WAC inheritance algorithm states that the automatic inheritance no longer has effect for a resource that has an ACL, but that does not stop inheritance from from being explicitly used and defined using `ac:imports`.
```
